WIP Add a matchName selection option to the NetworkPolicy namespace selector API (#2113)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/20201014-NamespaceAsName.md

```
    type NamespaceSelector struct {
      names []string
      labels *metav1.LabelSelector
    }
```

which is referenced from the namespaceSelector:

```
    + NamespaceSelector *NamespaceSelector
    - NamespacesSelector *metav1.LabelSelector
```

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As an administrator i want to allow access from monitoring pods in kube-system namespace, into any pod in my cluster, as a fundamental policy. 

#### Story 2

As an user I want to "just add" a namespace to my allow list without having to manage the labels which might get added/removed over time from said namespace.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

### Risks and Mitigations

- CNIs may not choose, initially, to support this construct, and diligent communication with CNI providers will be needed to make sure it's widely adopted.

> - CNIs may not choose, initially to support this construct, and dilligent communication with CNI providers will be needed to make sure its widely adopted.

Reviewer: why is this line duplicated?

Author: fixed, pushing

## Design Details

- Add a new selector to the network policy peer data structure which can switch between allowing a "matchName" or "matchLabels" implementation, supporting a policy that is expressed like this:

- A list of conventional namespaces
The "conventional namespaces" will look like so:
```
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: mysql-allow-app
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mysql
  ingress:
  - from:
    - namespaceSelector:
         matchName:
         -  my-frontend
```

### Test Plan

We will add tests for this new api semantic into the exting test/e2e/ network policy test suites in upstream which cover both of these scenarios, using the validation framework outlined in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/20200204-NetworkPolicy-verification-rearchitecture.md#motivation 

### Graduation Criteria

> Note that we may not have explicity feature gates for this KEP, because NetworkPolicies typically haven't been implemented with gates.  We keep this section for the time being in any case as it organizes our thinking around the general progression of the feature over time.

Reviewer: All new field introductions need gates for at least one release.

Author: fxd

#### Alpha 
- Communicate CNI providers about the new field
- Add validation tests in API which confirm several positive / negative scenarios in the test matrix for when this field is present/absent

#### Beta
- The name selector has been supported for at least 1 minor release

> - Four commonly used CNI providers implement the new field, with generally positive feedback on its usage.

Reviewer: Why is this written in terms of CNI providers instead of NetPol providers?

Author: Updated

```

The latter comment received 9 likes as a github issue - indiciating the general popularity of this as a request, and that correlates well to feedback we've seen in the broader community as well.

We thus conclude that, even though targetting an object using its name is not normal in K8s, in the case of NetworkPolicies, the overwhelming need for universal, easy to define security boundaries, makes a strong case for amending the API to support a "special" selector for namespace names that is **independent** of labels.

### Goals

- Add a `matchName` option (which is additive to the current `matchLabels` selector).
- Add an additional semantic mechanism to "allow all" namespaces while excluding a finite, specific, list of namespaces (canonically, this might be `kube-system`, as this is an obvious security boundary which most clusters would prefer).

### Non-Goals

- Support matching of wildcard namespaces

## Proposal

> In NetworkPolicy specification, inside ``NetworkPolicyPort`` object struct specify a new ``PortRange`` field:

Author: :)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

### Risks and Mitigations

- CNIs may not choose, initially to support this construct, and dilligent communication with CNI providers will be needed to make sure its widely adopted.
- Fractionating the Kubernetes API idiom by introducing a separate way to select objects.  We accept this cost because security is a fundamentally important paradigm that justifies breaking other paradigms, at times. 

## Design Details

- Add a new selector to the network policy peer data structure which can switch between allowing a "matchName" or "matchLabels" implementation, supporting a policy that is expressed like this:

This selector has two, EXCLUSIVE, possible input types:

- A list of conventional namespaces OR 
- A `*` with an `exclude` rule as in input to this selector

The "conventional namespaces" will look like so:
```
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: mysql-allow-app
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mysql
  ingress:
  - from:
    - namespaceSelector:

>          matchName:

Reviewer 2: Adding a `matchName` field to `namespaceSelector` is potentially a breaking change because we would have to create a new internal struct for `namespaceSelector` to something like:
```go
type NamespaceSelector struct {
  metav1.LabelSelector

  matchNames []string
}
``` 

While maybe we can get away with not breaking json/yaml serialization, I think we still break clients creating NetworkPolicy types off of the new version? If this is a breaking change, at worse we should add a new field outside namespaceSelector. But breaking changes aside, I like `matchNames` under `namespaceSelector` much better.

Reviewer 3: An alternative to changing the syntax would be to add a "virtual label" with some name that is not a valid label name (eg, `virtual/name` which is not valid because the prefix part isn't a DNS name). Then you could just do:

    - namespaceSelector:
        matchLabels:
          virtual/name: my-frontend

but also you could do

    - namespaceSelector:
        matchExpressions:
          - key: virtual/name
            operator: NotIn
            values:
              - kube-system

Author: ive never understood the virtual labels thing... are there any examples of how people hack stuff up to use these ?

Reviewer: Let's not invent ad hoc syntax. Please :)

Adding a field to metav1.LabelSelector is dangerous at best.  I find it confusing - it's not a selector in the usual kubernetes sense.  Also breaks clients which should not be taken lightly.

Virtual labels are interesting but if we want to go that route, we'd need to pause and define that whole mechanism.  Does it apply to all selectors and all resources?  Is it just for "name" or does it have other uses?  Does it show up when I GET an object?  This is a KEP of its own.

The *simplest* option here is to add `namespaceNames []string` to `NetworkPolicyPeer`.

You still have to define what consumers should do if they don't support this field.  They would see a `NetworkPolicyPeer` with no fields set which fails validation.  So to make this work we would need to specifically loosen that validation.  Define that to mean "allow none".  That, of course has to be alpha-gated.  We'd really need to work with the mail implementations to verify that they either do the right thing already or change them to treat that safely.

So (for example) the very best case: 1.20 could allow empty peers and add support for `namespaceNames[]` if and only if the  gate was enabled.  1.21 could flip the gate to default-on for both (beta or GA, TBD).  If it takes a while to get implementations doing the right thing, we may have to leave it in alpha for longer.

Reviewer 3: > You still have to define what consumers should do if they don't support this field.

> If it takes a while to get implementations doing the right thing, we may have to leave it in alpha for longer.

The feature gate should be tracking "are we satisfied with the API?". That's separate from "does everyone implement the API?" though clearly related.

#2137 is an attempt to deal with the problem of NetworkPolicy feature versioning more generically (though of course, if it merges in the same release as this feature does then it doesn't really solve the problem for _this_ feature since plugins that didn't implement namespace names probably wouldn't implementing versioning either)

         -  my-frontend
```

Meanwhile, the "exclude" implementation, will look like this:

```
  ingress:
  - from:
    - namespaceSelector:
         matchName:
         -  *
         exclude:
         - kube-system
```

### Test Plan

We will add tests for this new api semantic into the exting test/e2e/ network policy test suites in upstream which cover both of these scenarios, using the validation framework outlined in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/20200204-NetworkPolicy-verification-rearchitecture.md#motivation 

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha 

> - Add a feature gated new field to NetworkPolicy

Reviewer 2: What's the feature gate called?

Author: yeah, i think we dont need one per dands comment ill just delete this

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

The ability to target namespaces using names, when building NetworkPolicy objects, has been a request from the broader k8s community for quite some time.  In the sig-network-networkpolicy API group, it was one of the most popular policies which was voted on.

## Motivation

NetworkPolicies are under utilized by developers when defining applications, and the most obvious tenancy boundary for a developer is that of **the Namespace**.  We thus aim to make this boundary **extremely** obvious and easy for users to target in a maximally secure manner.

Although service-mesh and other technologies have been slated to obviate the need for developer driven security boundaries, these technologies aren't available in most clusters, and aren't supported by the Kubernetes API.

The ability to provide granular and intuitive network boundaries between apps is part of the braoder vision to make the NetworkPolicy API a universal security construct implemented in all production applications. 

> 

Reviewer 4: @jayunit100 wdyt about inserting the original issue here? And maybe the ML discussion? :D

Author: done

much easier to specifically allow only namespaces you control since you 
know your own namespace names. 
```

- Another recent argument was made on the basis of targetting namespaces using names, rather then labels, on the basis of **sheer convenience**.

```
While matching things like pods etc by label is certainly worthwhile, when matching a namespace I suspect the majority of the time you only want to match a single namespace. It been great match against the name rather than just a label. I suspect most people don't think to add labels to the namespaces.
```

The latter comment received 9 likes as a github issue - indiciating the general popularity of this as a request, and that correlates well to feedback we've seen in the broader community as well.

We thus conclude that, even though targetting an object using its name is not normal in K8s, in the case of NetworkPolicies, the overwhelming need for universal, easy to define security boundaries, makes a strong case for amending the API to support a "special" selector for namespace names that is **independent** of labels.

### Goals

- Add a `matchName` option (which is additive to the current `matchLabels` selector).

> - Add an additional semantic mechanism to "allow all" namespaces while excluding a finite, specific, list of namespaces (canonically, this might be `kube-system`, as this is an obvious security boundary which most clusters would prefer).

Author: updated, pushing shortly...

### Non-Goals

- Support matching of wildcard namespaces

## Proposal

In NetworkPolicy specification, inside `namespaceSelector` specify a new `Name` field.  One possible implementation of this would be:

```
    type NamespaceSelector struct {
      names []string
      labels *metav1.LabelSelector
    }
```

which is referenced from the namespaceSelector:

```
    + NamespaceSelector *NamespaceSelector
    - NamespacesSelector *metav1.LabelSelector
```

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> As an administrator I want to block all users from accessing the kube-system namespace as a fundamental default policy.

Author: updated, pushing shortly

#### Story 2

As an user I want to "just add" a namespace to my allow list without having to manage the labels which might get added/removed over time from said namespace.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: We need to consider how policies using the new feature will be interpreted by plugins that don't yet support the new feature. eg:

- causes the plugin to crash due to unexpectedly invalid data
- causes any `NetworkPolicyPeer` using the new feature to look like it says "allow all"
- causes any `NetworkPolicyPeer` using the new feature to look like it says "allow none"

Some of these possibilities are better than others...

Author: fixed pushing shortly

Reviewer: This is probably my prime concern with this proposal

Author: updated to include these below , pushing shortly

> - CNIs may not choose, initially to support this construct, and dilligent communication with CNI providers will be needed to make sure its widely adopted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- CNIs may not choose, initially, to support this construct, and diligent communication with CNI providers will be needed to make sure it's widely adopted.
```

> - Fractionating the Kubernetes API idiom by introducing a separate way to select objects.  We accept this cost because security is a fundamentally important paradigm that justifies breaking other paradigms, at times. 

Reviewer 3: There are other APIs that select objects by name in some cases. I don't think this is a "risk". It's a choice that needs to be defended, but it's not a risk.

Author: fxd

## Design Details

- Add a new selector to the network policy peer data structure which can switch between allowing a "matchName" or "matchLabels" implementation, supporting a policy that is expressed like this:

This selector has two, EXCLUSIVE, possible input types:

- A list of conventional namespaces OR 
- A `*` with an `exclude` rule as in input to this selector

The "conventional namespaces" will look like so:
```
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: mysql-allow-app
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mysql
  ingress:
  - from:
    - namespaceSelector:
         matchName:
         -  my-frontend
```

Meanwhile, the "exclude" implementation, will look like this:

```
  ingress:
  - from:
    - namespaceSelector:
         matchName:

>          -  *

Reviewer 4: As you said supporting matching of 'wildcard namespaces'  is a non goal, don't you think this syntax (with *) will lead to some confusion? Just thinking here.

Reviewer 3: yeah, it seems like it would be clearer to do `matchNameExcept:` or something

Author: yeah this `*` is kinda sneaky, restricted regex, will mislead people.  
`matchNameExcept` seems equally weird though to me... ill bring this up on the call today

         exclude:

>          - kube-system

Reviewer 3: This policy says "allow connections from all namespaces except kube-system" which is the opposite of the thing you said you wanted to support and is therefore confusing.

Author: Yeah, i guess as an egress rule this makes more sense, but better yet i think removing this for now, discussing it and re-adding it later is better given ricardos comment above ...  the user story for the exclusion rules is a little messy ATM.  fixing...

```

### Test Plan

We will add tests for this new api semantic into the exting test/e2e/ network policy test suites in upstream which cover both of these scenarios, using the validation framework outlined in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/20200204-NetworkPolicy-verification-rearchitecture.md#motivation 

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha 

> - Add a feature gated new field to NetworkPolicy

Reviewer 3: In the past we have not used feature gates for new NetworkPolicy features.

Author: sure, im happy to modify this or remove it, ill bring this up at the mtng today

Reviewer 4: @andrewsykim can you please provide the api guide discussed in the meeting? Thanks!

Reviewer 2: I believe feature gates and now required for new fields to stable APIs to ensure safe rollback https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-field-in-existing-api-version

- Communicate CNI providers about the new field
- Add validation tests in API

#### Beta
- The name selector has been supported for at least 1 minor release
- At least one CNI provider implements the new field
- Feature Gate is enabled by Default

#### GA Graduation

> - At least two CNIs support the The name selector field

Reviewer 3: I think "at least one" and "at least two" are too small for an NP feature. We don't currently have good support for being able to express that the CNI plugin doesn't support a NetworkPolicy feature that exists in the API. Therefore, it is bad when the feature is there but plugins don't support it. So we should aim for reasonably broad support before we start encouraging users to think it's safe to use.

Author: broadened to include 4 - am assuming that might be something like ovn, calico, cillium, antrea.

Reviewer: still says 2 here?

Author: fixed pushing shortly

- The name selector has been enabled by default for at least 1 minor release

> #### Removing a Deprecated Flag

Reviewer 3: (this section is irrelevant to this KEP and can be removed)

Author: fixed

marked as `provisional` is a working document and subject to change. You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->

> # KEP-xxxx: Add Namespace as Name field to NetworkPolicy

Reviewer 4: @jayunit100 suggestion to change here to KEP-2112 as this should be the issue number

  - if a namespcee name is retrieved by an api client which doesn't yet support it, the client doesnt crash (and the plugin doesnt crash, either).
  - if a namespace name policy doesn't exist (is null), then the policy should behave identically to any policy made before this field was added, that is, 
- Both "allow all" and "allow none" could be incorrectly interpretted incorrectly, so we need to make sure that plugins not implementing the feature don't get misled by the new data structure.

the `NetworkPolicyPeer` should be as obvious as possible to interpret in a way that is compatible with the semantics of the v1 policy API **before** this feature was added to it.  

## Design Details

- Add a new selector to the network policy peer data structure which can switch between allowing a "matchName" or "matchLabels" implementation, supporting a policy that is expressed like this:

- A list of conventional namespaces
The "conventional namespaces" will look like so:
```
kind: NetworkPolicy
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: mysql-allow-app
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mysql
  ingress:
  - from:

>       matchName:

Reviewer 4: Probably here is ``namespaceNames``

Reviewer 4: but reading loud, ``namespaceNames`` as a field doesn't sounds strange? wouldn't be better to be only ``namespaces`` here?

Author: updated to `namespaceSelectorAllow` , because now that were putting this in NetworkPolicyPeer, I figured having uniform naming to align it with `namespaceSelector` (i.e. it extends the namespaceSelector rather then being a logical union with it, as we do w/ podSelectors and so on)
